biological immunoassay indicators (hand held assays); tests for anthrax, richin, botulinum toxin, plague, tularemia, brucella and orthopox. Quick accurate tests that can be used on site. Porous surfaces could hinder effectiveness; colorimetric detector tubes; detects specific gases and vapors. Uses tubes with different reagents which react to material tested. If hazardous materials are present the reagent changes color. Bellow or piston draws sample into tube; pH meter; measures acidity or alkalinity. Probe is inserted into material and pH is displayed; pH paper strips; chemical reaction changes color of the paper. Used on liquid surface. Relies on color perception; reagents; a substance or solution combined with a material causing a chemical reaction. Used for specific chemical and biological agents; test strips; instantly detects common chemical agents in the atmosphere. Must be verified by another instrument. Consist of strips that change color in the presence of a category of products; combustible gas indicator; measures the concentration of a combustible gas or vapor in the atmosphere. Does not identify other hazards such as toxicity. Uses an electrical circuit known as a Wheatstone bridge; DNA fluoroscopy; identifies specific DNA sequences in order to identify biological agents; oxygen meter; detects oxygen deficient and oxygen enriched atmospheres. Some materials (chlorine) will indicate higher levels of oxygen even in deficient environments; electrochemical cells (carbon monoxide meters); measures concentration of carbon monoxide and no other materials; flame ionizing detector; tests for organic compounds (hydrocarbons such as butane or hexane). Only detects materials that can be burned and destroys most of the material being tested; gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer (GC/MS); Widely proclaimed as the gold standard. Used to analyze the molecular and ionic composition of chemical compounds; infrared spectroscopy; tests for solids, liquids, pastes, petroleum products, pesticides, fertilizers, plastics, plant materials, water, mineral acids, inorganic oxides, nitrates, chlorates, phosphates. Cannot identify biological agents; ion mobility spectroscopy; capable of detecting and identifying low concentrations of chemicals based on migration of gas phase ions; gamma spectrometer (radiation isotope identification device (RIID)); performs qualitative and quantitative analysis of gamma radiation capable of identifying gamma-emitting isotopes; metal oxide sensor; devices that translate the changes in concentration of gaseous chemical species into electrical signals. Detects below one ppm. Requires warm-up time; photoionization detectors; detects organic and some inorganic compounds. Increasingly being used for emergency response and remedial operations as a general survey instrument. Can measure toxic exposure; polymerase chain reaction (PCR); highly sensitive technique in which minute quantities of DNA and RNA sequences can be enzymatically amplified to the extent that a sufficient quantity of material is available to reach a threshold signal for detection; radiation detection and measurement instruments; used to monitor Alpha, Beta neutron and gamma radiation. Most commonly used to measure gamma rays, can detect but will not measure other forms of radiation. Are product specific and other chemicals may interfere with reading; raman spectroscopy (ahura); point-and-shoot operation through sealed translucent containers. Cannot use external laser on flammable, explosive or dark surfaces. Is extremely information rich; surface acoustical wave (SAW); able to detect presence of blister and nerve agents at the same time; wet chemistry; chemistry done in liquid phase, involves the use of laboratory glassware;